'Fake' NGOs That Got Cebu's Pork

SEVEN lawmakers from Cebu allegedly funneled at least P188.6 million in three years to nine non-government organizations (NGOs), which government auditors later said were dubious or highly irregular.
The Commission on Audit (COA), in a report released last month, said that more than 80 NGOs received public funds from the executive department in 2007 to 2009, but were not legally authorized to do so.
They also, among other lapses, were not selected by public bidding, failed to submit to government inspections or audits that would have shown what they did with the funds, or could not be located in their given addresses.
The nine NGOs that received the funds in those three years from Cebuano members of the House of Representatives are not among the groups allegedly organized by businesswoman Janet Lim-Napoles.
However, the three implementing agencies that worked with the congressmen and the NGOs were all implicated in the plunder and malversation cases filed in September by the Department of Justice (DOJ) against three senators, Napoles and 34 others. These implementing agencies are the National Agribusiness Corp. (NABCOR), Technology Resource Center (TRC) and National Livelihood Development Corp. (NLDC).
Nine dubious NGOs that received shares of the Priority Development Assistance Funds (PDAF) of Cebu's lawmakers from 2007 to 2009, according to the COA.
The largest share went to the Kabuhayan at Kalusugan Alay sa Masa Foundation, Inc. (KKAMFI), at P49.12 million. 
Aaron Foundation Philippines (AFPI) received P33.6 million.
An NGO that called itself the Gabay at Pag-asa ng Masa Foundations, Inc. (GPMFI) received P31.04 million, while the Gabaymasa Development Foundation, Inc. (GDFI) received P28.02 million.)
The Dr. Rodolfo A. Ignacio Sr. Foundation, Inc. (DRAISFI) received P14.4 million. 
Shares of P9 million each went to the Farmerbusiness Development Corp. (FDC) and the Infinite Community Integrated Development Support Foundation.
The NGO that received the smallest share of the Cebu lawmakers' PDAF, from 2007 to 2009,  was the Buhay Mo, Mahal Ko Foundation, Inc. (BMMKFI). It received P4.9 million.
Who were the Cebu lawmakers who gave part of their PDAF to these NGOs?
Former congressman Antonio Cuenco (Cebu City, South District) gave a total of P54.64 million of his PDAF to four of these nine NGOs, according to the COA report. His latest three consecutive terms in Congress lasted from 2001 to 2010.
Former congresswoman Nerissa Soon-Ruiz (Province, Sixth District) gave P38.54 million to three NGOs. Her last year in Congress was in 2010. 
Another former congresswoman, Clavel Asas-Martinez (Province, Fourth District), gave P33.6 million to two NGOs, the COA reported.
Former congressman and one-time Cebu governor Eduardo Gullas (Province, First district) set aside P28.4 million for two NGOs.
While he was congressman in 2007, Dr. Antonio Yapha (Province, Third District) gave P19.3 million to two NGOs. 
Former congresswoman Ramon Durano VI (Province, Fifth District) gave P7.2 million to one NGO. After his term in the House of Representatives ended in 2013, he was elected as vice mayor of Danao City.
According to the COA report, Rep. Benhur Salimbangon (Cebu Province, Fourth District) gave P7 million to one NGO. 
If you have any information on what activities these NGOs pursued in Cebu, particularly from 2007 to 2009, please email edinchief(at)sunstar(dot)com(dot)ph.

